# 2021-01-29 First steps and Motivation  

As a seasoned professional I desided about five years ago to change back into agile software development. So I searched for a small team to start building software like I have done in the early stages of my carrier.  

As an early adopter of java in 1996 I wanted to catch up with all the changes in development processes and techniques changed through the last decade where I did mostly managing services and tools for other development teams.  

I've done Groovy and Grails for internal scripting and smaller management tools. So my new team decided to use spring boot 1.2.x and java to write the riquired components and deploy these to first Docker and Docker Swarm and later to Mesosphere DCOS and nowadays to Kubernetes backed up by aws cloud services. 

During this time spring boot evolved in big steps and the functional paradigm entered the scene by a strong promotion of reactive programming.  

At a first glance it started out as just another framework extensions to be used. But the more I read the more I jumped into understanding the functional paradigm.  

What is this all about? Which languages are good for adapting the new (actually not so new) paradigm? - And what about all the knowledge I accumulated throughout my carrier as a developer? - Do I have to through it all over board to jump onto new grounds?  

So the new journey began. I started out reading on Haskall. Experimented with Elixir - just a little bit. And eventually jumped into Kotlin. What I really like about Kotlin is the way it is designed. It is made from paragmatic programmers for pragmatic programmers. - And it's about jvm. - And got almost all the nice features from groovy.

Because it was not the right time to adopt Kotlin I started to look more deeply into the development streams that make the world more functional.  

How can I adopt functional aspects of programming and bring these to my colleagues? That is actually the beginning of this blog.

So it will be mostly about  

* what are the principles of functional paradigm
* how to adopt DDD (domain driven design) - not mentioned jet
* how to evolve from an object oriented background based on Java
* how to use hexagonal architecture to combine business and technology
* what's about quality code and testing?

So the next steps will be to show entry points that will make Java development more functional. - What features does Java provide to support functional programming?
